docs(dashboard): Document contributing UI translations to the Dashboard (#5010)
vendurehq/vendure: docs/docs/guides/extending-the-dashboard/localization/index.mdx

[separate translation workflow](https://github.com/vendurehq/vendure/blob/master/packages/admin-ui/README.md#localization).
:::

The Dashboard's own message catalogs live at `packages/dashboard/src/i18n/locales/{locale}.po`, one
`.po` file per supported language. The English catalog (`en.po`) is the source and is always complete;
the others are translations of it.

### Improving an existing translation

Open the catalog for the language you want to improve — for example `de.po` for German — and fill in
or correct the `msgstr` values. An empty `msgstr` means that string is not yet translated and falls
back to English at runtime.

### Adding a new language

1. Add the [locale code](https://lingui.dev/misc/faq#which-locales-and-formats-are-supported) to the
   `locales` array in `packages/dashboard/lingui.config.js`.
2. From `packages/dashboard`, generate the catalog:

   ```bash
   npm run i18n:extract
   ```

   This creates `src/i18n/locales/{locale}.po` containing every UI string with empty `msgstr` values.
3. Fill in the `msgstr` values with your translations. There is nothing else to wire up — the

>    Dashboard loads catalogs by globbing that directory, so the new file is picked up automatically.

Reviewer: `lingui.config.js` alone isn't enough — the locale must also go in `defaultAvailableLanguages` (`packages/dashboard/vite/constants.ts`) or it never appears in the selector. And `i18n:extract` is `lingui extract && node ./scripts/translate/i18n-tool.js extract`; the second half writes a non-gitignored `missing-translations.txt`, right before this guide says to commit.

~~~suggestion
1. Add the locale code to the `locales` array in `packages/dashboard/lingui.config.js`. It must be a
   valid [`LanguageCode`](https://docs.vendure.io/reference/typescript-api/common/language-code/)
   value, which uses underscores for region variants (`zh_Hans`, `pt_BR`).
2. Add the same locale to `defaultAvailableLanguages` in `packages/dashboard/vite/constants.ts`. The
   **Display language** selector is built from this list, so a catalog missing from it can never be
   selected.
3. From `packages/dashboard`, generate the catalog:

   ```bash
   npx lingui extract
   ```

   This creates `src/i18n/locales/{locale}.po` with every UI string and empty `msgstr` values. Use
   `npx lingui extract` rather than `npm run i18n:extract`, which also runs an LLM helper that writes
   an untracked `missing-translations.txt`.
4. Fill in the `msgstr` values. The Dashboard globs that directory, so nothing else needs registering.
~~~

### Testing your translation locally

Run the development server so you can see your translations in the running Dashboard:

```bash
cd packages/dev-server
bun run populate   # first time only, to seed test data
bun run dev
```

> Open the Dashboard (`http://localhost:3000/dashboard`), then switch the UI language from the user menu

Reviewer: `bun run dev` runs `dev-workflow.mjs portless`, and `dev-network-config.mjs` sets `VENDURE_SERVE_STATIC_DASHBOARD: 'false'`, serving the Dashboard from Vite at a Portless origin (or `localhost:5173/dashboard` under `dev:direct`). Port 3000 is the static path this workflow turns off.

```suggestion
`bun run dev` prints the Dashboard URL when it starts — open that. It serves from Vite, so `.po` edits
are picked up on reload; the static build served by `DashboardPlugin` needs a rebuild. Then switch the
UI language from the user menu
```

at the bottom of the sidebar → **Display language**, and choose your locale. The interface re-renders
with your catalog; any string you left untranslated shows the English source.

### Opening the pull request

> Commit the changed `.po` file(s) (and the `lingui.config.js` change, for a new language) and open a PR

Reviewer: Follow-on from the `defaultAvailableLanguages` change above.

```suggestion
Commit the changed `.po` file(s) (and, for a new language, the `lingui.config.js` and
`vite/constants.ts` changes) and open a PR
```
